following on from my
video about the events of uh 1650 BCE in
the Jordan Valley I came across another
story which is about a different
settlement tell Abu Herrera in Syria a
much older settlement this was initially
inhabited 13
000 years ago through to about 9 000
years ago and it's very very significant
as in a a site in archeology and human
history because it marks the first
establishment of farming of Agriculture
people switched from Farm from being
hunter-gatherers over to actually
cultivating crops that they planted
themselves at this location and around
about this time
so the first occupation of the site is
dated to about 13
500 BCE
um and at the time it appears that the
civilization was very much the sort of
hunter-gatherer Hunter collector uh
civilizations all the serials that they
uh seem to be feeding upon where there's
evidence of the remains of them in uh
remaining pots and so forth seems to
indicate they were the wild variety uh
rather than the well-cultivated crop
and then that City lasted about 1300
years in this same sort of condition and
then suddenly their hunter-gatherers
abandoned the location and left it
um and moved elsewhere
and this seems to
line up with a cold period called the
younger dryas
climatic time when it was like a
miniature ice age for a period of time
that dropped the temperature down and
would have caused considerable stress
for the uh the community so it's likely
that they moved somewhere more
hospitable and possibly to the location
of near abet about 50 kilometers to the
Northeast
but then
later only 9500 BCE
the climate had returned back to normal
uh and uh the people reoccupied the site
again for around 2000 years and the
evidence shows a huge change in their
behavior they were now planting and
growing domesticated varieties uh much
greater yields from the crops with the
larger healthier seeds and so forth and
they probably learned how to do this
while they were away at Murray bet
so this period the younger dry ass was
marked on this uh his ancient history
timeline here and we have it running
from about 12 800 uh years ago here to
uh
um
this period here you can see the uh the
temperature in the timeline took quite a
dip this is the temperature uh in
degrees C based on the ice cores from
Greenland
um you can see they've been a warmer
period preceding it and then it went
very cold for a while and then quite
quickly recovered and went back to the
more uh typical temperatures that we
have now
and so it's quite likely that this would
have caused the uh settlers quite
significant stress resulting in the
moving now I've described this place as
a city uh actually it wasn't that big
there were only about 200 people and
they were located on one of the back
channels of the Euphrates river that was
uh what was making the area so um
fertile where they moved to and so this
is really where farming began
these days you can't do any more
archeology though because the whole area
has been buried in a lake like uh Assad
in Syria was created in the 1970s as a
drinking water reservoir and the whole
area has been drowned but fortunately
before it was drowned the archaeologists
were given a good opportunity to move in
and carry away with them everything they
could possibly manage and they found
lots of things all this evidence of
hunter-gathering fully by the change to
agriculture was discovered the uh the
heart structures of the settlers
accommodation and so forth but they also
found in a later analysis something else
and this is where our real interest lies
they found melted glass spheres
strewn across the whole region and these
are evidence of a 2 000 degree C
temperature
again this points to
an extraterrestrial Source a comet or
asteroid strike is really the only thing
that can create this sort of temperature
on Earth we we've looked at other cases
where we considered things like um
volcanoes well they only get up to about
1600 degrees uh an ordinary wildfires
it's only a thousand
so to create these glass spheres you
really can only have one explanation
and it's backed up by evidence uh from
the tremendous heat from
other examples where organic material
plants and so forth have been burned and
the fragments then embedded in various
Rock samples and pottery and so forth
there's even
globules of melted nickel iron which
point to an iron meteorite and these are
enriched with heavy metals like platinum
and uh iridium which really only can
have one source and that's amityarites
coming into the Earth's atmosphere and
either making it to the ground and
exploding or blowing up as a bullied
high in the uh Earth's atmosphere
and when we look across the world we
find actually this uh same event seems
to have got evidence scattered over uh
basically four continents from Asia uh
through Europe right across Greenland
North America and into South America
across this enormous elliptical shape
field plotted out on this projection
here and it looks like perhaps an object
entered the Earth's atmosphere and
perhaps fragmented into a number of
separate uh bodies and that they all
came crashing down to the Earth in
different locations in A Storm of
meteorite impacts and Scattered the uh
resulting material all over this large
area of the Earth
now this then of course created that
nuclear winter effect but blowing huge
amounts of dirt and dust into the
atmosphere and blotting the Sun out for
uh many many years uh creating uh the
mini Ice Age effect
um and also of course triggering waves
of Extinction of various creatures all
around the world
in America it seems to have affected the
local population it probably accounted
in Asia for this uh story and of the
switch to agriculture that I've talked
about it was probably the trigger the
local inhabitants probably witnessed the
blast
um and uh it may have done them no end
of damage
um and then survivors then moved to a
more hospitable location in an effort to
uh carry on
uh the evidence for it is all over the
world we find soot platinum and uh heavy
metals in South Carolina Nano diamonds
caused by the shock waves uh compressing
carbon under high temperature uh in
places like Mexico again Greenland
ice course showing a high Platinum
content from this date and uh even down
in in Chile there are glass spherials so
this was a almost a worldwide uh event
really quite a big one
in North America
there are swarms of fragments uh there
appear to have then set most of North
America on fire there's huge amounts of
burning that occurred and it probably
took care of the North American Mega
beasts uh the megafauna the giant sloths
the uh
um uh mammoths and mastodons and so
forth were one of the casualties of this
event
uh they were of course being hunted
heavily by the Clovis point people with
their special shaped Spears that uh
characteristic of their culture and they
too disappeared probably as a result of
the really appalling conditions that uh
were found
now one problem with this story has been
for a long time that nobody's been able
to really pin down a large impact crater
but perhaps that's now changed
um there's the higher water crater up in
Greenland which was originally suspected
of being uh associated with this time
period but may date to uh the wrong time
but there's a second impact that's been
found and is now covered in the ice
sheet of Greenland and it's buried so
that you can't actually see it you have
to use radar to penetrate down through
the ice in order to reveal this uh
crater and this was recently announced
in a paper in nature and this is a
reconstruction of the shape of the
crater underneath the the kilometer
thick ice layer which has been shown in
cutaway here in this representation so
it's quite possible that we've now found
essentially The Smoking Gun for this
event that triggered this mini ice age
called the younger dryas and had
catastrophic effects across at least
half of the globe but was also
responsible for the emergence of uh
human farming and agricultural
civilization just goes to show that
necessity is the mother of invention and
that these bad catastrophes can lead to
Innovation and it's the adaptability of
human beings that has enabled them to
find their way around these sorts of
problems that results in us being here
now
and with that I'll bring this little
talk to a close I hope you've enjoyed
another example of uh death from
disguise